good afternoon everyone
it's really good to be here with you
today
i'm going to start
by reflecting back on 2005.
so 2005 was when i landed my first job
as a sales rep
i was thrilled it was so exciting i had
finally gotten to this place in my
career where i was going to be there
helping the customers working with them
and hopefully making a lot of money
i'm standing outside my boss's office
and
a whole crew of people comes out
two of them
crying
what is going on here
that was back in a time where we used to
beat up
our sales reps
we had people who were the high
performers and they were riding high and
they were getting all the accolades
their names were in lights they won
every spiff they were on the trips
and then you had the people
crying
in fact we used to have to do our calls
in front of everybody else
so that we could get called out for all
the things we weren't doing correctly
i don't know if any of you experienced
this or if you experienced this today
but we have a feast
and famine culture
in most sales organizations
and what is this leading to
this is leading to 60
of sales leaders
anticipating that their teams won't be
able to hit quota
i was scrolling through my linkedin feed
earlier today and i actually saw another
quote that said
cross think only six percent of their
reps will meet their individual quotas
this year
and when you ask the reps
they feel like we're not meeting it
either
there has to be
a better way
i remember going into
one of my last roles
and i said to the team
hey show me our top performing reps i
want to get to know them and learn what
they're doing and is it working or is it
not working
and so they sent me a list of the top
performing reps
and
they were at 80 percent of their number
for the year 82 of their number 83 of
their number not a single one of the
reps in this organization
had met their quota the previous year
but the company was doing well
the company had met their targets and
they were celebrating and we have this
vast
vast gap
between the company winning
and the sales reps suffering
and we see this all the time in tech and
sas where the growth is so high
yet reps aren't meeting their target
how can we
leave them behind
like that
well it's easy we say we set the targets
super high
and then they'll get further than they
ever would have gotten
if we hadn't set the target that high
but that doesn't work
because they're not with us they're not
creating that
success we're not a team working
together towards this common goal
i did work at a company that believed
this
they believed you set the target so high
and it was a top-down quota setting
process
so i got the number for the team
and i looked at it
and i looked at it some more
and then i brought up some spreadsheets
and i did some calculations
and i couldn't figure out how we could
get to the number
so what did we do we actually reframed
it we reframed it to growth
if we get to 40 growth that is going to
be super successful
but we shouldn't have to do that
what if we change the paradigm
what if we expected
all of our reps achieved their quota
and we did our planning that way and we
built our organization
that way
melissa no we couldn't do that
we have models
and our model says that only 50
of reps can meet their quota
that's how all the numbers make sense
and that's how we don't pay out too much
commission and we achieve our target as
a company
how does that feel to a rep to come into
an organization and say like
we're betting against you
we have set it up so you have a one in
two chance of meeting your ot
of paying your bills of sending your kid
to university
how motivating is that
for a rep
but it's what we do
so how did i get
to thinking differently about this
i had a call about a year ago that
kind of slapped me in the face woke me
up i was talking to another cro and she
said to me oh no melissa
we do our planning so
of our reps can achieve their quota
and i i was flabbergasted i had nothing
i had nothing left to say
i just said i don't i don't understand
how does that work
how do you
pay people how do you not go under
and she said well we've organized it
that way
we actually have a
reverse buffer
so explain what i mean by that because
not every organization does buffers but
if you do buffers i'm sure you do it
where
[Music]
all the reps have a target
and then the manager target is a little
bit less
and the director's target is a little
bit less than that
the leader's target is less than that
and the company target is less than that
why do we do that
because we are betting against our reps
we are creating scenarios where the
company wins but the people doing the
hardest jobs
don't win with us
what this organization does is
they say here's the reps number
and the manager has a hundred five
percent
and the directors have a hundred and ten
they are betting for
their reps
and what that shows is this wonderful
environment where people feel like
they're set up for success that they're
expected
to win
and the psychology
of someone expecting you to win
is totally different than knowing
that we've set it up for half of you to
lose
and so
this has
totally changed my mindset personally on
it
to where i'm starting to think more and
more on
what can we do differently for
everyone to be able to win
for us to all win together
what would that do for
our culture
and our environment and our growth
as a company
and so we start out by saying
invest in self
the development for each individual to
develop their skills
to be able to attain their targets
after you're investing in yourself and
developing yourself
then it's about investing
in customer
and as we pour all of those learnings
and all of our great skills
into our customers
then our company can grow
and that's the stage in which
we do it
because you know what
for the vast majority of reps
i don't think they're lazy
i don't think they're trying
not to attain their targets
they want to
but what we're saying to them is
go attain your target
and not outlining how to do that
and what that would look like we're the
lazy ones
we say let's hire great reps and they'll
be able to figure it out
anyone in this room heard that or said
that ever
thanks for being honest there
yeah we've all said that that's the
whole point of the hiring process get
people they'll figure it out
but why
would we want them to use all of their
energy
out there in the deep end of the pool
trying to figure it out
when
we're the ones who should actually
be figuring it out
and
that's where being a sas organization
is a beautiful place to be
because when done right
a sas sales organization
is extremely predictable
it shouldn't be complex
it should be simple
and straightforward
and a little secret
is that just because you're selling sass
does not mean you have a sas sales
organization
so what does it mean if you're setting
up
or if you're in an organization that has
a broken
sas sales model
one is it's not predictable
you have this feast or famine
environment of your reps
and when you have some reps blowing it
out of the water and other reps who
aren't and this cycle of performance
management and people leaving the
organization you can't have the
predictable model that is kind of the
cornerstone
of being a sas company
so you want to think about land and
expand
sure everyone in this tent has heard
land and expand
but in a sas organization
how do you know if you have the right
land and expand model
well there's kind of two
choices
you are encouraging and motivating
supporting compensating your reps for
the hundred thousand dollar deal
or
you're doing all of that for 10
10 000 deals
in a land and expand model we really
want to create a system where people can
get the 10 10 000 deals
obviously i'm just using those numbers
for rounding purposes
but you want them to have as many deals
as possible so that you're growing your
customer base
by which you can expand it
that one 100 000
customer
may churn
may not have any growth left in it
and so you're not setting up this
trajectory of being able to grow every
single quarter and every single year the
expanding customer base
that you have
the second piece is pace
you want to create a system that has a
fast pace
so you might have some reps who are
saying like oh i'm there's no good
quality leads in here
i'm waiting for those good quality leads
to come why won't marketing give them to
me
but what we find is that it's
quantity that leads to quality
and so having that pace of conversations
with the leads and conversations with
your customers
is when you're going to uncover that
really awesome amazing deal
and the great news is you'll get a lot
of other deals in the process
and
you might come across a lead that you
may have just pushed to the side
and then it's coming back again
the third is metrics
when we think about setting up this
predictable
sas sales organization
it is all about the metrics
because when you have land and expand
and pace
it's the math that helps you to know
whether you're on track or whether
you're off track
it's not a big enterprise software where
we're always talking deal by deal by
deal
because
ideally you have so many deals that
that's not the way that you manage them
so thinking about the metrics that
matter
that can be things like pipeline
velocity
or it could be things like the number of
meetings that people are having
the key is that they are leading
indicators and not lagging indicators
because with the lagging indicator it
takes too long to figure out that
something isn't going right so if you're
measuring win rate for example you're
not going to know that you're behind on
your win rate until the quarter closes
and so that's too late to make the
adjustments and pull the levers that are
required to get back on track
and then the last piece in the scalable
sas predictable model is the playbook
this gets back to what i was saying
on we tell people go get your number
figure it out
there are organizations that have put
playbooks and processes in place
that actually tell a rep
if you do these things you will be
successful
and that is
the way that we're able to enable and
empower each rep to have success
we set them up for success
we believe and we've set our plan that
they're expected to get to their number
but we give them the roadmap on how to
do it
it makes the coaching
so much easier too because you can look
at the playbook and you can know
did they do this
check did they do this
check did they do this nope all right
this is where i have to lean in
with them
and so it's not about saying you know
this person just needs to leave the
organization because we're out of ideas
we're able to map it back to the
playbook
and then we can constantly iterate on
that and because our great reps don't
have to figure it out on their own
they're figuring out how to make it
better
right instead of them
starting at zero
and then trialing and erroring they're
already starting at the 80 percent
and then they're using their awesomeness
and their
excellent skill set
to move the entire organization forward
and it's a virtuous cycle
you know we we talk about and
there's been so much written lately
about the great resignation
right and many of us are probably
feeling that where people are leaving
and there are so many jobs and they just
want to do something different
that puts a lot of pressure
on your business and your model so
we're thinking about it in a way of
when people win
people believe they can win
and when you have more and more people
in your organization feeling that
they're set up for success
they're no longer sitting back with
their arms crossed and saying like oh
our product isn't working or if only the
the features were better or if we could
catch up to our competition we have
people leaning in and they are winning
and they're staying longer
and this is what we want
because in the sas sales model the
people metrics have the greatest impact
so we get distracted by all the things
out there whether it's the product or
the leads or
the events or what have you
instead of focusing on the things that
we can control
and that's these people metrics
and so i want to start by saying like
we all need to know these
and why do we need to know these because
these are key inputs into
our plan
i've seen some organizations falter
because they take their attrition number
and they
they take the number of sorry they take
the number of reps they have
and they multiply it by their quota
great we have 10 reps and a million
dollar quota so our plan for the year
should be 10 million
the end of the year you're going to be
like
that is not going to work because
people don't stay and then it takes a
long time to fill them
so
what happens when a sales rep leaves the
organization
well duh melissa we backfill them
and
sales reps
in my experience
are are treated as
disposable
like there is an infinite amount of them
out there and if one isn't working we'll
just get rid of that one and we'll bring
the next one on
and that's not true
we are running out
of sales resources in the tech space
it's one of the reasons we're all just
stealing them from each other
and so we want to think about how do we
keep them and not have this attitude
of just moving them on
if they're not successful
because remember we set them up to not
be successful
right we're the ones who said only 50
percent of you are going to meet your
number
so if you
if you're buying into all this and you
might say like
i don't
you know that's not how the world works
some sales reps are successful some
aren't and
i love that
i love the
dog eat dog world of sales and that's
what makes it great and fun you're on
this high then you're on the slow then
you're on the high then you're on the
low then you're fired
so if you like that
go for it
but if you're saying like
maybe maybe she's on to something and
what if we did want to create this
environment where everyone can win and
we're all winning together and people
are set up for success and we expect
them to be great
how would we do it
so
we must create this culture
where people feel like
they matter
where they feel like they have an impact
on the organization
any engagement survey you look at or any
article you read about what keeps people
it's about feeling connected it's about
feeling like they have a small part in
the success of the company
and so we have to do this
if we want to keep our people and drive
our business forward
and so i said at the outset that
i'm new to this i've only really been on
this journey myself for about a year you
know i was the person that was beating
up the low performers you have to do
better you stink you're lazy
so it's been a transition for me i'll
say
but so what are we doing at hootsuite
because at hootsuite we have
made a commitment to this transformation
so much so that we have set a target
as a company that we
shout from the rooftops that everyone is
aware of
a target that
of our reps meet their quota
we are
far from that
when i came into the organization about
a year ago
we had this
old school environment that i was
sharing about
and so every single quarter we're
measuring how we've been able to move
the needle
and
so we say and every rep knows that my
leadership team is accountable to
a hundred percent of reps meeting their
quota
i measure it
this is the dashboard that i look at
every single morning
before i look at our bookings before i
look at
how things are converting i look at this
dashboard
how are all of our refs as individuals
doing
how have they moved week over week how
are we
able to get them
to the
number which leads to the third thing
that we're doing
we have a
program that we launched called lift up
and so in the past i had programs that
were like beat down manage out
if you're below 25
you put them on
a
performance improvement plan which was
really code for
you're going to be gone in 30 days
instead now we have this lift up program
where any rep who is below a certain
threshold get their managers together
and we talk about what are the things
prohibiting this rep
from success
we work with our sales enablement team
to provide extra resources
but you know what like
it takes a lot to build back trust
reps are a little bit uncertain about
this
we tell them the lift up program is us
putting our arms around you
giving you a hug helping you out getting
you the support that you need so you can
lift up
and win with all of us
i was talking to a manager recently
and he said to me you know melissa i was
really like taken aback i was talking to
this rep in the lift up program
and he said to me like
how much how much time do i have
because that's over the years what had
been beaten into him that this was just
another another code word for
you're on your way out
and so we have to
build the trust back so reps believe
we're actually
trying to help them so that they can be
vulnerable and share back with us
that
they're having a problem or they're not
sure how to self-source or prospect or
negotiation has been difficult for them
because until they build we build the
trust with them where they believe that
we actually want them to be successful
it's hard to get to the root cause
and help them in order to do that
and then the next thing we've been doing
is creating our rewards
and spiffs
so that
everyone can win
so a lot of times in in the past history
uh that i've had we've set up spiffs
that say the top performing rep gets
trip to bermuda or they get a weekend
away
or any of the things we put out there
but it's always for
the top rep
maybe we have segments the top rep in
commercial the top rep in enterprise or
mia but it's always for the top
and
in reflection on that that's very
exclusionary
you're competing with your friends and
the people next to you and there's only
one spot
for someone to be declared excellent
and so what we do is now we have
all of our spiffs and trips set up to be
everyone can qualify
so if you meet a certain threshold
you can be a part of it
and we hope that that creates this
environment and spirit where people
work together
where they know the more the merrier
and so that's something that's been a
change
and then finally leaning in on the
managers
we've started recognizing our managers
not on their percent to quota
because right the feast and famine
environment a manager can have someone
who's at 200 of their number and
everyone else is at 30 and they're
meeting their number and they're being
celebrated
the purpose of a manager is to
help each one
of their reps to achieve their target
not just one and leave everybody else
behind
so now our expectation of managers is
percent of reps on their team
who achieve their quota
and we measure them and recognize them
on individuals getting to their number
so we had our top manager last quarter
who was recognized he had 100 of his
reps
achieving their quota
now we just had one
but it's it's a journey
and we're
on the way to be doing that
and so i will leave you with
kind of five takeaways
as you think about
creating this culture and environment
where
everyone can win
the first is have a formula to drive
success
this is the metrics i was talking about
knowing what metrics drive the
performance the leading indicator
metrics it's also the designated
playbook and process
that will get people there
so whether you have a huge sales
organization today or just a couple or
you haven't started your sales
organization
please do not depend on people figuring
it out that is our lazy way of saying
please do our job for us
take the time to figure out what works
and lay out that pathway to success for
your team
then looking at fair comp plans i didn't
talk too much about this but this is
also a change that we recently made
where we were noticing that based on the
ote model
and how people were paid
people were getting paid different
amounts
for closing the same amount of dollars
so we didn't think that was fair so what
we did was we said
hey everyone who has this dollar amount
quota
has this much in variable comp
and so now every single rep in the
organization knows that they are being
paid fairly
and equitably for the work that they're
contributing to the organization
and then changing expectations of
managers so this is what i was talking
about of are managers successful if
their people aren't successful
you have to decide what works for your
company but for me it was pretty clear
that a manager's role
is to enable empower and help their
people to achieve success and greatness
and the last one is an acronym that i
introduced probably in my first quarter
at hootsuite which is guyat
because in tech we don't have enough
acronyms now so i had to add another one
so gaia has become a rallying cry which
is give it a try
all these great ideas come to the table
and everyone has a reason why it doesn't
work
we tried that before you don't know our
industry blah blah blah it doesn't work
so what we try to do now when a new idea
is brought to the table is we say
let's first start by talking about why
could this work
and that opens up so much more
productive conversations
why could this work
what if we gave it a try
and then i have an acronym that goes
with it which is
too long to actually remember but it is
what's the worst that could happen
and just asking that is so powerful
to say what's the worst that could
happen if we gave it a try
and so
i leave you with that
creating a culture
where everyone matters to your
organization
they feel it
they know it
you've set them up that way
and why not give it a try
thank you very much
[Music]
you